From: Simon Wood <s.wood@bath.ac.uk>
To: r-help@stat.math.ethz.ch
Subject: Re: [R] Relative GCV - poisson and negbin GAMs (mgcv) 
Body:Sorry for the tardy reply - got filtered to the wrong place...

> I am using gam in mgcv (1.3-22) and trying to use gcv to help with model
> selection.  However, I'm a little confused by the process of assessing GCV
> scores based on their magnitude (or on relative changes in magnitude).
>
> Differences in GCV scores often seem ""obvious"" with my poisson gams but
> with negative binomial, the decision seems less clear.
- This is not well  documented - sorry. The negative binomial is a special
case for mgcv::gam (see ?gam.neg.bin). To handle the extra parameter of the
negative binomial, smoothing parameter estimation *has* to be performed via
`performance iteration' (see ?gam.method), which is not the default for any
other family. Within the IRLS loop of the performance iteration an extra step
is inserted which estimates the negative binomial parameter at each
iteration, in order to try and achieve a scale parameter estimate of 1
(see ?gam.neg.bin). However, trying to force the estimated scale parameter to
1 will also force the GCV score used in performance iteration to be close to
1 (at least for large samples), whatever model is fitted.... so comparison of
GCV scores between different neg.bin models is unlikely to be very
informative. In addition small changes in GCV score are not meaningful when
comparing different models fitted by performance iteration, for any family
(again see details section of ?gam.method). I think that AIC() would provide
a better basis for comparing alternative neg.bin GAMs: it's even more
approximate than usual when used in this context, since the neg.bin parameter
estimate is definitely not an MLE, but it will still give a much more
meaningful guide than comparison of GCV scores, in this case.

For other families none of these problems occur provided the default direct
(`outer') smoothness selection method is used.

